Here is today's tech briefing. caret Java is the most widely used programming language for enterprise software, Android development, and university computer science courses. Apple doesn't include Java with macOS, so you need to install it yourself. If you search for "install Java on Mac," you'll find a confusing number of vendors, version numbers, and installation methods. To make it easy, I'll cut through the confusion and show you a recommended Java installation path that takes about five minutes. Here's my recommendation: Install Java 25 using Homebrew with the Eclipse Temurin distribution. Java 25 is the current LTS (Long-Term Support) release and your best choice unless your work team or university course uses an older version. With Homebrew, one terminal command accommodates the entire installation. The Temurin distribution is free, certified, and unencumbered by Oracle's licensing restrictions. Now I’ll walk you through the process. Table of Contents What You Need Before You Begin How to Check if Java Is Already Installed Why Eclipse Temurin and Why Not Oracle How to Install Java with Homebrew How to Verify the Installation How to Set JAVA underscore HOME for Build Tools How to Troubleshoot Common Problems Alternative Installation Methods What's Next What You Need Before You Begin With this recommended path, you only need two things before you install Java: a terminal application and the Homebrew package manager. Terminal Terminal is the built-in Mac terminal application. If you don’t know, you can learn how to open Terminal here. You'll use it to run the installation commands. Homebrew Homebrew is a package manager you can use to install software programs for the command line. Check if you already have it like this: dollars brew --version Homebrew 5.0.11 If you see a version number, you're ready. If you see zsh: command not found: brew you need to install Homebrew first. Follow the instructions at Install Homebrew. How to Check if Java Is Already Installed Run this command to check for an existing Java installation: dollars java -version You'll see one of two results. If Java is installed, you'll see output like this: openjdk version "25.0.1" 2025-10-21 LTS OpenJDK Runtime Environment Temurin-25.0.1 plus 8 (build 25.0.1 plus 8-LTS) OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM Temurin-25.0.1 plus 8 (build 25.0.1 plus 8-LTS, mixed mode) If the version number shows 25, you already have the latest Java and you can stop here. If Java is not installed, you'll see a message, "The operation couldn't be completed. Unable to locate a Java Runtime." You'll need to install Java as described below. If you previously installed Java but see this dialog, something is wrong with your installation. See Unable to Locate a Java Runtime for troubleshooting. For detailed guidance on Java version output, see Check Java Version on Mac. Why Eclipse Temurin and Why Not Oracle If you search for Java downloads, you'll encounter several potentially confusing terms. Here's what they mean. JDK stands for Java Development Kit. It contains the compiler, runtime, and developer tools you need to build and run Java applications. Vendors used to offer a JRE (Java Runtime Environment) for non-developers, but now the JDK does everything. OpenJDK is the official open-source implementation of Java. All major Java vendors build from this same source code, so the core functionality is identical across vendors. Eclipse Temurin is the distribution many developers recommend. It comes from the Adoptium project and is backed by IBM, Microsoft, Red Hat, and Google, among others. It's completely free for any use, including commercial production. Temurin is TCK-certified, meaning it passes Oracle's official compatibility tests (over 139,000 of them). You can trust that your Java code will run correctly. Why not Oracle JDK? Oracle changed its licensing in January 2023. The new model charges per employee across the entire organization, not per Java user. A 500-person company would pay dollars 90,000 per year. Oracle actively audits for compliance. Temurin is functionally identical to Oracle JDK and is free to use under its open‑source license, avoiding Oracle’s Java subscription fees. If you deploy to A W S, Amazon Corretto is another good free option. If you need Java 8 for legacy code, Azul Zulu provides well-supported builds. For a comparison of Java distributions, see Install JDK on Mac. How to Install Java with Homebrew Homebrew offers two ways to install Java: the cask method and the formula method. The cask method is easier because it installs the vendor's macOS package to the standard system location. Apple's macOS discovers it automatically with no extra configuration. Run these two commands: dollars brew update dollars brew install --cask temurin at 25 The first command refreshes Homebrew's package list. The second downloads and installs Eclipse Temurin JDK 25. Homebrew places the JDK at slash Library slash Java slash JavaVirtualMachines slash temurin-25.jdk slash . This is the standard macOS location for Java installations. Apple's macOS includes a Java launcher at slash usr slash bin slash java that automatically searches this directory. You don't need to configure your PATH. Homebrew also detects your Mac's chip architecture automatically. You'll get the correct native build whether you have an Apple Silicon or Intel Mac. For more details about the Homebrew installation process, including the alternative formula method and troubleshooting, see Brew Install Java, Cask Method. How to Verify the Installation After installation, open a new Terminal window. Existing windows may not detect the new installation. Check the Java version: dollars java -version openjdk version "25.0.1" 2025-10-21 LTS OpenJDK Runtime Environment Temurin-25.0.1 plus 8 (build 25.0.1 plus 8-LTS) OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM Temurin-25.0.1 plus 8 (build 25.0.1 plus 8-LTS, mixed mode) This confirms three things: the version number (25.0.1), the distribution (Temurin), and that the 64-Bit Server VM is active. Check the compiler: dollars javac -version javac 25.0.1 List all installed JDKs: dollars slash usr slash libexec slash java underscore home -V Matching Java Virtual Machines (1): 25.0.1 (arm64) "Eclipse Adoptium" - "OpenJDK 25.0.1" slash Library slash Java slash JavaVirtualMachines slash temurin-25.jdk slash Contents slash Home If all three commands produce the expected output, Java is installed and working. How to Set JAVA underscore HOME for Build Tools For most users, Java works immediately after installation. The java and javac commands are available with no additional setup. However, some build tools require the JAVA underscore HOME environment variable. Apache Maven, Gradle, and Android S D K all look for it. If you see errors mentioning "JAVA underscore HOME is not set," you need this step. If you only run Java applications or use IntelliJ IDEA (which manages Java paths internally), you can skip this section. Add this line to your tilde slash .zprofile file: export JAVA underscore HOME= dollars ( slash usr slash libexec slash java underscore home) This uses Apple's java underscore home utility to find the installed JDK automatically. After saving the file, you'll need to run source tilde slash .zprofile or close and reopen your terminal. Verify it works: \( echo \)JAVA underscore HOME slash Library slash Java slash JavaVirtualMachines slash temurin-25.jdk slash Contents slash Home For complete configuration instructions, see Set JAVA underscore HOME on Mac. How to Troubleshoot Common Problems "Unable to locate a Java Runtime" message keeps appearing. Run java -version to verify Java is installed. If you just installed Java, see Unable to Locate a Java Runtime. Wrong Java version appears. You have multiple JDKs installed and macOS selected a different one. Run slash usr slash libexec slash java underscore home -V to list all installed versions. See Set JAVA underscore HOME on Mac to point to the version you want. Alternative Installation Methods Homebrew is the fastest path, but other options exist. Manual download: You can download the .pkg installer directly from adoptium.net and double-click to install. This is a good choice if you don't use Homebrew. See Install Java on Mac for detailed instructions. Homebrew formula. The command brew install openjdk at 25 installs a Homebrew-managed build. This approach requires manual symlink configuration before macOS can discover it. See Brew Install Java, Formula Method for details. Version managers. Tools like SDKMAN and mise can install and switch between multiple Java versions per project. If you work on codebases that require different Java versions, see Java Version Managers. What's Next You now have Java 25 installed on your Mac. You've verified it works and configured JAVA underscore HOME for build tools. You're ready to compile and run Java applications. If your team or university course requires Java 21 instead, see Install Java 21 on Mac. If you need to remove Java, see Uninstall Java on Mac. This article is based on my guides that offer additional details about how to install Java on Mac and choose the latest Java version. Learn to code for free. freeCodeCamp's open source curriculum has helped more than 40,000 people get jobs as developers. Get started

Thanks for listening. Find the full article link in the description.