Here is today's tech briefing. caret Platforms like Ver-sell, Net-li-fy, and Render simplify deployment by handling infrastructure for you. In this tutorial, we’ll step one layer deeper and work directly with A W S to understand the building blocks behind these platforms. You'll take a small React and Express notes app and ship it straight to A W S. We'll use E C 2 for the A P I, RDS Postgres for the database, and S 3 (optionally CloudFront) for the frontend. If you're new to A W S, you can turn on the Free Tier first: Link in description. If you’ve mostly used one-click deployments before, this guide will help you understand what’s happening behind the scenes. You’ll work directly with the core A W S services involved, focusing only on the pieces that matter so you can see how everything fits together. This will also enable you to have more control over cost, security, and scaling. If you just want to grab the finished code, it's all in this public repo: umair-mirza slash mern-notes-aws. You can clone or fork it and follow along without creating a new project from scratch. Table of Contents What You’ll Build Prerequisites Mental Map Free Tier Basics Environment Variables Step hash 1 - Run It Locally First Step hash 2 - Push to GitHub (So E C 2 Can Pull) Step hash 3 - Create A W S Resources (Quick Path) Step hash 4 - Configure the E C 2 Box Step hash 5 - Build and Upload the Frontend Step hash 6 - Quick Troubleshooting Step hash 7 - Secure and Save Step hash 8 - Verify End-to-End Next Steps What You’ll Build Before touching any buttons in A W S, it's helpful to know the exact pieces you're trying to build. At the end of this guide, you'll have a classic three-tier web app: a browser-based frontend, a backend A P I, and a database, all talking to each other over a network. A P I (Express slash Node) on E C 2 Postgres on RDS (Free Tier eligible) React slash Vite frontend on S 3 (CloudFront optional for CDN slash H T T P S) Health check at slash api slash health and CRUD at slash api slash notes Prerequisites You don't need to be a DevOps expert to follow along, but you should be comfortable running basic commands in a terminal and editing some config files. If you've ever used npm install before, then you're in the right place. A W S account plus A W S C L I configured (aws configure) – see A W S account setup and A W S C L I install. Node.js 18 plus and npm – get it from nodejs.org. Git plus GitHub repo – see GitHub getting started. (Optional) Route 53 domain for a clean U R L – Route 53 domains. Mental Map A W S throws a lot of jargon at you (VPCs, security groups, subnets). This section is the story version of what happens when someone opens your app in the browser, without any buzzwords. If you can picture this flow, the later A W S screens will feel less scary. Browser loads the built React app from S 3 (or CloudFront -> S 3) Browser calls the A P I on E C 2 over H T T P slash H T T P S E C 2 talks to RDS Postgres on port 5432 inside your VPC Security groups: allow 80 slash 443 to E C 2; allow 5432 only from the E C 2 SG to RDS Free Tier Basics A W S can be cheap if you use the free tier, but it can also surprise you with bills if you accidentally orprovision or leave things running. Here are the main knobs that affect cost for this tutorial and what to watch out for. E C 2: t2.micro or t3.micro tilde 750 hours slash month RDS: db.t3.micro Postgres slash My sequel with tilde 20 GB storage S 3 slash CloudFront: Small sites cost pennies - free tier includes some egress Save money: Stop E C 2 when idle. Delete unused buckets slash DBs Environment Variables Environment variables are just configuration values that live outside your code: ports, database URLs, and allowed origins. They keep secrets (like DB passwords) out of your Git repo and let the same code run in different places (local, staging, production) with different settings. Backend: PORT, DATABASE underscore U R L (your RDS endpoint), DATABASE underscore S S L (true on RDS), CORS underscore ORIGIN Frontend: VITE underscore A P I underscore U R L (A P I base, for example, Link in description.) Step hash 1 - Run It Locally First Before touching A W S, you want to prove the app actually works on your own machine. This removes a whole category of "Is it A W S or my code?" debugging later. In this step you just install dependencies and run both backend and frontend in dev mode. cd mern-notes-aws hash Backend cd backend npm install cp .env.example .env hash set DATABASE underscore U R L to RDS (or local Postgres), DATABASE underscore S S L=true for RDS npm run dev hash A P I on Link in description. hash Frontend (new terminal) cd frontend npm install cp .env.example .env hash keep A P I U R L at Link in description. for local dev npm run dev hash SPA on Link in description. . If something is broken here, pause and fix it before moving on. A W S will only make debugging harder. Step hash 2 - Push to GitHub (So E C 2 Can Pull) Your E C 2 server in A W S needs a place to pull your code from. Using GitHub is the simplest option: you push your code once, then the E C 2 instance clones that repo. You can also reuse this repo later with CI slash CD if you decide to automate deployments. cd mern-notes-aws git init git add . git commit -m "feat: mern notes app" git branch -M main git remote add origin Link in description. git push -u origin main If you're following along with my example repo instead of creating your own, you can simply fork umair-mirza slash mern-notes-aws and use that as your remote. Before pushing, make sure your .env file is not committed to GitHub. Add it to your .gitignore so secrets like database passwords never end up in version control: echo ".env" >> .gitignore If you’ve already created a .env file locally, double-check it doesn’t appear in git status before committing. Step hash 3 - Create A W S Resources (Quick Path) RDS (Postgres, Free Tier template) RDS (Relational Database Service) is A W S's way of running managed databases for you. Instead of installing Postgres manually on a VM, you click a few options and A W S handles backups, patching, and high availability. For this app we only need a small, free tier–eligible Postgres instance. For more background, you can skim the official Amazon RDS for Postgres docs. We’ll start by creating the database layer. The settings below are the minimum you need for a small, production-style Postgres setup that stays within the A W S Free Tier while still following basic best practices. RDS Create database Postgres Free Tier. Class db.t3.micro, storage 20 GB gp2 slash gp3. Set master user slash pass. You'll need them for DATABASE underscore U R L. Public access: No. Security group: allow 5432 only from the E C 2 security group. Enable backups and Require S S L. Download the RDS CA if you want strict cert validation. S 3 Bucket for the Frontend S 3 is A W S's "infinite hard drive" for files. A React slash Vite app builds down to plain H T M L, C S S, and Java script files, which are perfect to host from S 3. Think of S 3 as a very simple web server that just serves static files. If you want to see more options, check the Hosting a static website on Amazon S 3 guide. Now, we’ll create an S 3 bucket to host the React frontend. These options configure the bucket for static website hosting while keeping it simple and inexpensive. Create bucket mern-notes-aws-frontend- . For simple hosting, enable static website hosting and allow public reads, or keep private and use CloudFront plus OAC. Turn on versioning if you want rollback safety. E C 2 for the A P I E C 2 is "a computer in the cloud" that you control. You'll install Node.js on it, pull your code, and run server.js so that your backend A P I is always on. The security group attached to this instance works like a firewall. If you've never launched an instance before, the Getting started with Amazon E C 2 guide walks through the console screens you'll see. Finally, we’ll provision a small E C 2 instance to run the Express A P I. The configuration below focuses on a free tier–eligible setup that’s secure enough for learning and easy to extend later. Launch Amazon Linux 2023, size t3.micro. Inbound SG: 22 (your IP), 80 (world), 443 if you add H T T P S on the instance slash ALB. Attach this SG as the allowed source to RDS. Optional: CloudFront plus Route 53 CloudFront is A W S's CDN (content delivery network), and Route 53 is their DNS service. You don't strictly need them to get your app working, but they make it faster and nicer: your app loads from edge locations close to users and can live behind a friendly domain like app.example.com. For more details, see Getting started with Amazon CloudFront and the Route 53 DNS developer guide. Origin: the S 3 bucket. Default root index.html. Add OAC if bucket is private. Request an ACM cert in us-east-1, then create a Route 53 A slash AAAA alias to the distribution. Step hash 4 - Configure the E C 2 Box Once your E C 2 instance is running, you treat it like a clean Linux machine. The commands below install the tools your A P I needs, pull your code from GitHub, configure environment variables, and run the server in a production-safe way. Install basics: sudo dnf update -y This command updates all system packages to the latest versions. It's a good first step on any new Linux server. sudo dnf install -y git Installs Git so the E C 2 instance can clone your repository from GitHub. curl -fsSL Link in description. pipe sudo bash - Adds the official NodeSource repository so you can install a modern version of Node.js (v20). Amazon Linux doesn’t ship with recent Node versions by default. sudo dnf install -y nodejs Installs Node.js and npm, which are required to run your Express A P I. sudo npm install -g pm2 Installs PM2, a lightweight process manager that keeps your Node app running in the background and restarts it if it crashes or the server reboots. Pull code and set environment variables: git clone Link in description. cd mern-notes-aws slash backend npm install cat <<'EOF' > .env PORT=80 DATABASE underscore U R L=postgres: slash slash : at :5432 slash DATABASE underscore S S L=true CORS underscore ORIGIN=Link in description. EOF Start the A P I with PM2: pm2 start server.js --name mern-notes-api pm2 save pm2 startup systemd -u ec2-user --hp slash home slash ec2-user PM2 is a small process manager that makes sure your Node server keeps running if the machine reboots or the process crashes. Test on the box: curl Link in description. From your laptop: Link in description. (make sure SG allows 80 slash 443). Step hash 5 - Build and Upload the Frontend In development, Vite serves your React app from memory, but in production you want a set of static files that any web server (or S 3) can host. npm run build creates an optimized dist slash folder that you sync to S 3 so the browser can load it. cd frontend setx VITE underscore A P I underscore U R L "Link in description. npm run build This sets an environment variable called VITE underscore A P I underscore U R L on your local machine. Vite only exposes environment variables to the frontend if they start with the VITE underscore prefix. Upload: aws s3 sync dist slash s3: slash slash mern-notes-aws-frontend- slash --delete This uploads your compiled frontend (dist slash ) to S 3 and removes old files that no longer exist locally, ensuring the bucket reflects the current version of the app Open the S 3 website U R L or your CloudFront U R L. Step hash 6 - Quick Troubleshooting If something doesn't work the first time, that's normal, especially with networking and A W S permissions. This section gives you a few quick places to look before you start randomly changing settings in the console. A P I 500s: pm2 logs mern-notes-api. This is often a bad DATABASE underscore U R L or S S L flag. DB connect issues: RDS SG must allow the E C 2 SG - use the RDS endpoint. CORS errors: CORS underscore ORIGIN must match your frontend origin exactly. 403 from S 3: If you’re using static website hosting, allow public reads. With CloudFront, keep bucket private and use OAC. Blank page: Confirm that you’ve uploaded dist slash to the right bucket. Step hash 7 - Secure and Save Once everything works, you don't want to accidentally expose your database to the internet or burn through free tier hours. These are simple, beginner-friendly hardening steps that make your setup safer and cheaper without turning you into a full-time security engineer. Turn off S S H after setup or switch to SSM Session Manager. Use H T T P S (CloudFront plus ACM or ALB plus ACM)....

Thanks for listening. Find the full article link in the description.